The JSON Schema Charter (#325)
json-schema-org/community: CHARTER.md

## 2: Lieu of a Board

In lieu of a separate Business Governance Board, the TSC assumes all authority in decision making.

## 3: JSON Schema Governing Body (TSC)
The JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee (TSC) is initially established from the observed major contributors who are currently active and in good standing.

The TSC must have a minimum of four members. There is no maximum TSC membership size.

TSC memberships are not time-limited.

The TSC follows the decision-making process defined in this charter unless otherwise documented.

The TSC aims to work asynchronously. TSC meetings are pre-announced, public, and recorded. Minutes are taken and the recordings made available. If there is a reasonable reason (such as security or privacy), any portion of a meeting, its minutes, and recording, may be kept private.

## 4: Roles & Responsibilities

The JSON Schema project is governed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) which is responsible for high-level guidance of the project.

The TSC has final authority over this project including:

> - Technical direction

Reviewer: Should this explicitly include budget and financial decision making?

# JSON Schema Charter
<!-- This document is managed in the json-schema-org/community GitHub repository. Please do NOT modify this file in another repository as changes may be overridden. -->

## 0: Guiding Principles
The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation. The JSON Schema project strives to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Having no structure in place usually leads to one that is informal and undocumented, making it difficult to meet our own expectations of how the TSC wish to operate. As such, the JSON Schema project define the following charter which includes aspects of the governance model to which the TSC subscribe and by which the TSC operate.

## 1: Scope

> JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.

Author: While initially thinking about this, I thought I agreed, however on reflection, I'm not sure I do. It's not in scope of JSON Schema to care about other languages which "compile" to JSON, such as YAML.

> JSON Schema isn't about the JSON data format itself, but about describing data expressed with that format, as well as others.

I think this is only partially true. JSON Schema can only cater to a subset of YAML for example. It's possible to roundtrip from JSON to YAML to JSON, but not always possible to roundtrip from YAML to JSON to YAML.

The use of "JSON data format" was used in effort to convey the "in memory" materilization of the data, as opposed to just a JSON file.

I agree that "eliable use of data expressed in the JSON format" may make this clearer, however I'm not convinced about "other formats compatible with the JSON document model". "compatible" in what way?

Do you have any additional thoughts on this?

> JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.

Reviewer 2: I feel like the existing wording focuses on the JSON format itself, suggesting that we're doing syntax checking of JSON files. But actually, we're starting with a presumption of valid JSON, and working with data presented in that format instead.

How about "data presented in the JSON format"?

While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. The JSON Schema project aims to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

### 1.1: In-scope
The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.
Primary concerns are areas the JSON Schema project wish to give focus to. Secondary concerns, while remaining in scope, aren't areas of focus, and would require dedicated championing by community members to come to fruition.

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard
  - Validation of JSON-compatible data
  - Semantic annotation of JSON-compatible data

>   - Interoperability

Reviewer 3: I think the interoperability here is across systems, platforms, and languages.

>   - Interoperability

Reviewer 2: I like Greg's wording -- "interoperability across systems, platforms and languages". That covers pretty much everything!

  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
- Documentation

> - Test suite

Author: There is a lot detail that could be added to all of these items. This is supposed to be really high level. What do you feel we would gain from being more specific here?

- Community
  - Enabling schema authors
  - Enabling implementers
  - Engaging with industry
  - Engaging with upstream and downstream standards and projects
  - Communicating value
  - Ensuring the sustainability of the project

Secondary Concerns
- Hypermedia
- Generating JSON Schema
- Using JSON Schema to generate
  - Code (including types or classes)
  - UI (including forms)
  - Databases
- Relational validation
- Vocabularies registry

> 

Author: What value have you seen come from the OpenAPI format registry?

> 

Reviewer 2: It provides a reference for applications so they can provide a consistent implementation of formats -- which is why we have specifications.

> 

Reviewer 3: It should be noted (and I imagine Karen is aware from the OpenAPI side of things) that were looking at importing the format registry from OpenAPI.

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's address the format registry later. I'm still in favour of us taking that on from OpenAPI.

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

> Standards that the JSON Schema project uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor standards and projects that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), are not things which the JSON Schema project has any control over.

Reviewer 4: Nit: grammar.
```suggestion
Neither standards that the JSON Schema project uses (such as JSON and IRI) nor standards or projects that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI or AsyncAPI) are in scope, nor does the JSON Schema project has any control over them.
```

> Neither standards that the JSON Schema project uses (such as JSON and IRI) nor standards or projects that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI or AsyncAPI) are in scope, nor does the JSON Schema project have any control over them.

Reviewer 5: This sentence seems a bit in conflict with the interoperability goal. I guess being interoperable with OpenAPI is somewhat part of the mandate?

Author: I would argue no. Our interoperability objective is across languages.
Say OpenAPI released an update that made some new requirement of JSON Schema... We should not bend the JSON Schema specification to match something else, which could be detrimental to many other use cases.

The point of this phrasing/section is to make clear that we do not control upstream or downstream projects. We often get people asking "can you make JSON do X?" or "can you make OpenAPI do Y?".

Of course, we are open to, have been, and will continue to collaborate and provide expert advice to upstream and downstream projects, as we are able to. But, not at the expense of the JSON Schema project itself, and not a significant amount of time.

Reviewer 5: Thx

Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of the JSON Schema project, it is delegated to the JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee ("TSC").

### 2.1 Other Formal Project Relationships
Section Intentionally Left Blank

## 3: JSON Schema Governing Body (TSC)
The JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee (TSC) is initially established from the observed major contributors who are currently active and in good standing.

The TSC must have a minimum of four members. There is no maximum TSC membership size.

TSC memberships are not time-limited.

The TSC follows the decision-making process defined in this charter unless otherwise documented.

The TSC aims to work asynchronously. TSC meetings are pre-announced, public, and recorded. Minutes are taken and the recordings made available. If there is a reasonable reason (such as security or privacy), any portion of a meeting, its minutes, and recording, may be kept private.

> 

Reviewer 2: Any restrictions on the maximum percentage of Governing Body members that can be employed by the same company? The risk of one company exerting undue influence over the direction of the project is real.

Reviewer 3: We looked at this before, I but I don't remember (or necessarily agree with) why it was removed.

## 4: Roles & Responsibilities

The JSON Schema project is governed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) which is responsible for high-level guidance of the project.

The TSC has final authority over this project including:

- Technical direction
- Project governance and process (including this policy, though changes to this policy must be approved by the CPC)
- Contribution policy
- GitHub repository hosting and administration
- Establishment of and delegation to working groups or teams
- Mediating technical conflicts

It is also responsible for establishing a Code of Conduct Committee suitable for mediating non-technical conflicts.
In any period where such a committee is not yet formed, the TSC must assume temporary responsibility of mediating such conflicts in addition to responsibilities enumerated above.

In joining the TSC, members commit to communicate on a regular basis and respond to issues raised by the TSC in a timely manner. If they are no longer able or willing to make such a commitment, they should discuss this with the TSC or a TSC Chair.

### 4.1 Project Operations & Management

> The TSC and entire technical community will follow any processes as may be specified by the OpenJS Foundation Board or the CPC relating to the intake and license compliance review of contributions, including the OpenJS Foundation IP Policy.

Reviewer 2: Are there any such requirements today that we should be making a note of?

Author: This is in reference to the requirement to use a CLA or DCO, and the IP policy: https://ip-policy.openjsf.org

I may be looking to seek an exemption for CLA/DCO, but that remains to be seen.

The TSC is expected to agree upon and maintain specific process and procedure which facilitate labelling or communicating which decisions have been formally decided upon by the TSC.
This process should include a mechanism for identifying ongoing TSC discussions and decision-making.
When concluded, decisions should include reasoning and/or justification of the TSC, as well as indication of the consensus of the committee, or lack thereof in the case of a voted decision as indicated above.
Private decisions should also be documented in a private location accessible to parties expected to have access to them.

## Code of Conduct Findings & Violations

Code of Conduct incidents must be reported to the TSC by the Code of Conduct committee.
Reports must remain anonymous, as per the Code of Conduct, but should be documented in a manner similar to private TSC decisions as mentioned.

## 5: Definitions

TSC: The JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee, delegated technical leadership for the JSON Schema project by the OpenJS Foundation.

---

> This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 UK: England & Wales License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/uk/).

Reviewer 4: I think you need to add a copyright notice if you're adding a specific license. Also, this license isn't one of the approved licenses. I'm assuming that this is because part of the text was originally pulled from elsewhere. Ironically, this isn't an approved license for documents, so it might be worth checking whether there remains actual content from the original and if an acknowledgement of inspiration (and a CC-BY 4) isn't an acceptable option in that case.

Author: Good call. I removed/migrated the "This work is a derivative of..." text, because I didn't feel it was any longer, so this applies.

Do we need to/should we have any licence/copyright notice to this?
If it might be useful to others, I would want it to be copyable.

How do we proceed? =]

Author: Updated as discussed. Thanks.

> TSC: The JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee, delegated technical leadership for the JSON Schema project by the OpenJS Foundation.

Reviewer 3: Remove OpenJSF

TSC members are expected to regularly participate in TSC activities.

The TSC will meet regularly using virtual conferencing tools. The meeting will be directed by the TSC Chairperson(s). Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by a TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording will be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.

The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

A TSC member may be removed by vote from the TSC if, during a 3-month period, all of the following are true:

- They attend fewer than 25% of the regularly scheduled meetings
- They do not participate in any TSC votes
- They do not provide any form of excuse or no excuse is known for their absence

> ## Section 4: Roles & Responsibilities

Reviewer 6: I'll suggest to include roles and responsabilities for Contributors and Committers:

Contributors include anyone in the community that contributes code, documentation, pull request reviews, or other technical artifacts to the Project (“Contributors”);
Committers are Contributors who have earned the ability to modify (“commit”) source code, documentation, or other technical artifacts in a project’s repository (“Committers”);
A Contributor may become a Committer of a given Project’s repository by majority approval of the repository Committers.
A Committer must be listed in the CODEOWNERS file of a given Project’s repository, along with the scope of their responsibility in the repository.
A Committer may be removed from a Project’s repository by the majority approval of the other Committers of the same repository.
Participation in the Project through becoming a Contributor and Committer is open to anyone so long as they abide by the terms of this Charter.

Author: I'm aware this aspect isn't defined, and I agree we should define it, however I'm not sure it belongs in the charter, but rather a separate Governance.md document.
We may also want to migrate some other content there, such as parts of the decision making process, when we have such a document ready to receive content.

I propose we don't define these roles now, but make it a task for the TSC.

## 0: Guiding Principles
The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation. The JSON Schema project strives to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Having no structure in place usually leads to one that is informal and undocumented, making it difficult to meet our own expectations of how we wish to operate. As such, we define the following charter which includes aspects of the governance model to which we subscribe and by which we operate.

## 1: Scope
JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.
While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. We aim to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

> ### 1.1: In-scope

Reviewer 3: Should we highlight interoperability as an "in-scope" item?  Specifically, if a behavior is intended to only operate in a confined and controlled environment by a single implementation, is that in scope for us?

Author: This took me more thinking time than anticipated.
To me, being a "standard" _implies_ interoeprability is of paramount concern. I can't imagine how a standard would not also mean being concerned about interoperability. (I guess I could, maybe, if I thought long enough...)

Under "Publication of the JSON Schema standard", I had included "extensibility". What does that mean? It means that as part of the standard, we should be concerned about extensibility. It matters.

Could "interoperability" go there also? If it did, what would it imply? I don't really know, given, to me, "standard" already covers that.

Then I thought, it could go in the "out of scope" section.

Looking at the comment you linked to, it sounds like you're suggesting that standardising an approach to SVA's is something you'd consider out of scope?

I agree that we shouldn't define anything for a single implementation, but I also think that standardising a way for schema authors to create a two party agreement SVA has value, for things like tooling, an should be considered a good interoperable approach.

Reviewer 3: > Looking at the comment you linked to, it sounds like you're suggesting that standardising an approach to SVA's is something you'd consider out of scope?

No. That comment, and the entire conversation, is about ad-hoc non-SVA keywords.

Author: Ah, I see that clearly now. I was... a little tired last time.

OK, so I agree, we should add "interoperability" to "in-scope".
But I think what you're really asking for is to add "non-standard multi-party agreements" to "out of scope", right?

But, we do care about that, because that's what custom SVA would allow.
So, if I'm understanding right, that would mean you're asking for out of scope to include "non-standard multi-party agreements beyond custom single value annotations".

However, vocabularies could be just known between two parties. But you could say that's a "standard" approach.

All this to say, I agree interoperability should be included, but I'm not convinced that covers what you're asking for.

If I'm way off base here, feel free to say so 😅

Author: https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/pull/325/commits/aea0b80d98991b81d7c34c2875899cd05bf9f270 FYI

The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.
Primary concerns are areas we wish to give focus to, while secondary concerns are more likely to require the desire of the community to drive the work.

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard

>   - Validation of JSON data

Reviewer 2: Do we want to clarify here as "data that is compatible with the JSON document model"? Occasionally I hear "oh I can't use JSON Schema because this is YAML" which is showing a misunderstanding of what level the schemas are operating at.

Reviewer 3: Maybe more simply, "JSON-compatible data"?

Author: I would actually argue no for this. There are quite a few data formats which are comaptible with the JSON document model. We can't concern ourselves with being able to validate YAML for example. People can convert the YAML to JSON, but I don't think we should be calling out YAML or any other format that converts to JSON. IMHO that would be too broad a concern.

Author: I think we actually operate on our own definition of a JSON data model. So we can't say "The JSON data model".

Open to further thoughts.

Reviewer 3: From [Section 4.2.1](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core.html#name-json-schema-documents):

> JSON Schema interprets documents according to a data model. A JSON value interpreted according to this data model is called an "instance".
> 
> An instance has one of six primitive types, and a range of possible values depending on the type:
> 
> null: A JSON "null" value
> boolean: A "true" or "false" value, from the JSON "true" or "false" value
> object: An unordered set of properties mapping a string to an instance, from the JSON "object" value
> array: An ordered list of instances, from the JSON "array" value
> number: An arbitrary-precision, base-10 decimal number value, from the JSON "number" value
> string: A string of Unicode code points, from the JSON "string" value

While we say "_a_ data model," we also lay out exactly the data model described by JSON.  (I suppose, technically, we use "boolean" whereas JSON defines `true` and `false` tokens.)

Author: The data model we define also includes equality, section 4.2.2.

Author: Resolved with https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/pull/325/commits/fbe8b54623e127e698454ad947253aa501e00414 after discussing on an OCWM: https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/420

  - Semantic annotation of JSON data
  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
  - Creation of new

>   - Ingestion of existing

Reviewer 2: What does ingestion mean? Other comments imply that it means "take over ownership of".

Author: Given this seems to be a contrivertial thing (https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1059 and two other comments on this line), I've removed the specifics, which we can debate as required.

Additionally, after [discussing the topic at our in person summit](https://github.com/orgs/json-schema-org/discussions/391), I'm more in favour of trying to support implementers as much as possible to keep a project alive. Our strength is in the ecosystem, and implementers feeling empowered will help this.

Resolving for now.

# JSON Schema Org Charter
<!-- This document is managed in the json-schema-org/community GitHub repository. Please do NOT modify this file in another repository as changes may be overridden. -->

> ## Section 0: Guiding Principles

Author: I think it makes sense to keep the same numbered sections as per the provided charter template, as there's some alighment across OpenJS Foundation projects. This makes it easier to compare with others.

I'm not 100% sure what you're suggesting. Are suggesting removing the numbers or the section headers for those three parts?

> ## Section 0: Guiding Principles

Reviewer 3: I'm just suggesting we remove the word "section" from the major headers.  It's not something I typically see.  Usually it's just the number and title.

> ## Section 0: Guiding Principles

Author: Done

While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. We aim to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

### 1.1: In-scope
The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.
Primary concerns are areas we wish to give focus to, while secondary concerns are more likely to require the creation of a Special Interest Group.

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard
  - Validation of JSON data
  - Semantic annotation of JSON data
  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
  - Creation of new
  - Ingestion of existing
  - Long term support
- Documentation
- Test suite
- Community
  - Enabling schema authors
  - Enabling implementers
  - Engaging with industry
  - Communicating value
  - Ensuring the sustainability of the project

Secondary Concerns
- Hypermedia
- Generating JSON Schema
- Using JSON Schema to generate
  - Code (including types or classes)
  - UI (including forms)
  - Databases
- Relational validation
- Vocabularies registry

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

> Section Intentionally Left Blank

Reviewer: I might be tempted to include something to do with "decisions made in related projects with critical dependencies on JSON Schema such as Open API"; while we'd offer advice and input, and recommended practices as with any other community project, we're not responsible for those decisions.

Reviewer: Ideally there would be at least one other project in that list of "examples of projects that are not our problem"

Author: > Does this kind of statement maybe belong under section 2.1 "Other Formal Project Relationships"?

I'd say no, as there are no formal relationships. We may make some formal relationships later though which would be neat!

Author: > I might be tempted to include something to do with "decisions made in related projects with critical dependencies on JSON Schem... - @mwadams 

We discussed this on last nights [OCWM call](https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/issues/374). There were concerns it sounded rather abrasive. I'm going to try something that sounds less combative and more positive.

Author: @mwadams @gregsdennis I've pushed a change. Let me know what you think =]

Reviewer 3: I like it. I've already approved.

## Section 2: Relationship with OpenJS Foundation CPC.
Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of the JSON Schema project, it is delegated to the JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee ("TSC").

### 2.1 Other Formal Project Relationships
Section Intentionally Left Blank

## Section 3: JSON Schema Org Governing Body (TSC)
The TSC is initially established from the observed major contributors who are currently active and in good standing.

There is no maximum TSC membership size. The TSC must have a minimum of four members.

Changes to TSC membership should be posted in the agenda, and may be suggested as any other agenda item.

TSC memberships are not time-limited.

> While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (Especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.
```

Author: I'm going to suggest this is not correct, as it's the continuation of the same sentence with additional information as opposed to a new sentence.

https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/parentheses.html

Author: 🤦‍♂️ I read the diff the wrong way round. Apologies!

TSC members are expected to regularly participate in TSC activities.

The TSC will meet regularly using virtual conferencing tools. The meeting will be directed by the TSC Chairperson(s). Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by a TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording will be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.

The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

A TSC member may be removed by vote from the TSC if, during a 3-month period, all of the following are true:

- They do not participate in any TSC related discussions or votes
- They do not provide any form of excuse or no excuse is known for their absence

> The initial TSC members are @relequestual, @awwright, @gregsdennis, @Julian, @jdesrosiers, @karenetheridge, with @relequestual being the initial chair.

Reviewer 3: Since this is an official document, maybe we should specify actual names instead of github handles.

```suggestion
The initial TSC members are [Ben Hutton](https://github.com/relequestual), [Austin Wright](https://github.com/awwright), [Greg Dennis](https://github.com/gregsdennis), [Julian Berman](https://github.com/Julian), [Jason Desrosiers](https://github.com/jdesrosiers), and [Karen Etheridge](https://github.com/karenetheridge), with Ben Hutton being the initial chair.
```

### Section 4.2: Decision-making and Voting
The TSC follows a formal consensus seeking decision making model.
In some situations, a vote may be preferable, however a vote will not be used to make the vast majority of decisions.
In the unlikely case where it seems that consensus cannot be reached after multiple attempts, the decision process may be moved to resolve via a vote. This is not expected to happen, but defined as a backup.

#### Decision-making via consensus

When a TSC member looks for an issue to be discussed and a decision to be made, they must start by assessing if they feel it warrants potentially being a non-public discussion and decision. The TSC member must reach out to the TSC chairs to request a non-public discussion and decision. A discussion and decision will be non-public at the discretion of the TSC chairs. It is expected that decision discussions and voting will only be non-public in rare circumstances.

Both the Quick and Standard consensus process require the creation of an Issue in the TSC GitHub repository.
The Issue must:
- Include brief introductory information about the decision that needs to be made

> - Be labelled with 'tsc-decision'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Be labeled with `tsc-decision`
```

"Labeled" is the US standard.  [Ref](https://www.scribbr.com/us-vs-uk/labelled-or-labeled/)

We should probably agree to use either a UK or US standard for official documents (this, the spec, the website, documentation, etc.).

Also, you've used backticks for code formatting later for the `tsc-vote` label (line 192).  Changing here for consistency.

Author: I've tried to use US english. I don't always get it right though. Thanks for picking this up.

- Use the provided template, unless there is a good reason not to do so

> At any point, any TSC member may notify the TSC that they are taking a period of leave and should be considered to abstain from any signalling or voting. The TSC member must detail when they expect to return.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At any point, any TSC member may notify the TSC that they are taking a period of leave and should be considered to abstain from any signaling or voting. The TSC member must detail when they expect to return.
```

##### Quick consensus process

In the event a TSC member feels the need for a decision to be expedited, they may create the decision discussion, indicating that they wish to use the quick process rather than the standard consensus process. This should be done by creating a new Issue in the TSC repository.

> In addition to the requirements above, the Issue must be labelled 'expedited'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the requirements above, the Issue must be labeled `expedited`.
```

> While an associated Discussion is not required, if one is used, it must be clearly linked in both directions, and be labelled with 'tsc-decision'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While an associated Discussion is not required, if one is used, it must be clearly linked in both directions, and be labeled with `tsc-decision`.
```

A vote is called to see if other members agree. The vote takes place on the opening comment. This vote is different from the decision-making voting process, and only requires 3 (additional) votes in favour and none against to carry. If the vote carries, the quick process is started, otherwise the standard consensus process is started.

> The quick process is designed for small trivial issues where the resolution feels likely obvious, and the member who proposes the decision discussion has at least one clear resolution to present. The decision discussion owner should present the possible solution they are advocating for (in a follow up comment on the Issue. Not in the opening comment.), and ask to test for agreement. If consensus is not clearly reached, the quick process is ended and the standard consensus process is started. (Label 'expedited' should be removed and 'stage-1' added.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The quick process is designed for small trivial issues where the resolution feels likely obvious, and the member who proposes the decision discussion has at least one clear resolution to present. The decision discussion owner should present the possible solution they are advocating for (in a follow up comment on the Issue. Not in the opening comment.), and ask to test for agreement. If consensus is not clearly reached, the quick process is ended and the standard consensus process is started. (Label `expedited` should be removed and `stage-1` added.)
```

##### Standard consensus process

The standard consensus process is designed for all non-trivial decisions.

A decision discussion may be started by creating an Issue and Discussion in the TSC repository.

In addition to the requirements above, the Issue must:

> - Be labelled with 'stage-1'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Be labeled with `stage-1`
```

- Link to the associated initial Discussion

The Discussion must:
- Link to the associated Issue
- Include detailed introductory information about the decision that needs to be made

> - Be labelled with 'tsc-decision'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Be labeled with `tsc-decision`
```

Moving to the "Form a Proposal" stage should be approached when the group might feel able to combine ideas to form a single proposal. Multiple possible solutions should be discussed in the previous stage.

The "Test for Agreement" step is not voting, and is instead asking for "signals", which enable the consensus process to continue.
Voting should be considered a last resort if the consensus process has failed for a particular issue, to enable the project to move forward.

If someone calls for a Test for Agreement, the facilitator for the decision discussion will review the current proposal and may call to Test for Agreement. The facilitator will post a comment on the Issue (using the provided template), linking to the current version of the proposal, and update the opening comment with a link to the new comment. TSC members will then be asked to signal their agreement using GitHub Reactions on the comment.

> The signals include "Block". Any use of the "Block" signal will require a new or amended proposal to be worked on. A "Block" should be used to indicate a strong objection, such as something against the projects core principals or something that would harm the project.

Reviewer: Double Typo: "projects core principals" => "project's core principles"

If someone feels a "Block" is being used for unfair reasons, such as targeting individuals or to gain some personal advantage, or any such reason that might be in breach of our Code of Conduct, they should immediately report it to the Code of Conduct committee. The Code of Conduct committee should report this to the TSC Chairs as soon as possible, and the decision is halted while the committee investigates the report.

The Code of Conduct committee will report their findings and any remediation action to the TSC Chairs.
Reports must remain anonymous, as per the Code of Conduct.

The other signals that may be made when a Test For Agreement is called include "Reservations" and "Stand Aside". Both are signals which convey consent to let the proposal pass, however they may be conditional.

> Signalling "Reservations" means an agreement on the overall direction, however there is some desire to revise or amend the proposal somewhat. It is expected that the individuals signalling "Reservations" want to engage in reworking the proposal. The facilitator will check with each individual regarding the strength of the reservation, and later facilitate or direct discussion as required to amend and represent the proposal. If the individual/s do not wish to participate in reworking the proposal, their reservations should be logged as part of the decision record as unresolved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Signaling "Reservations" means an agreement on the overall direction, however there is some desire to revise or amend the proposal somewhat. It is expected that the individuals signalling "Reservations" want to engage in reworking the proposal. The facilitator will check with each individual regarding the strength of the reservation, and later facilitate or direct discussion as required to amend and represent the proposal. If the individual/s do not wish to participate in reworking the proposal, their reservations should be logged as part of the decision record as unresolved.
```

If "Reservations" is signalled three consecutive times by the same individual/s, anyone may call for no further attempts to remediate the reservations, and the proposal will pass.

Signalling "Stand Aside" convey consent, but an unwillingness for whatever reason to be further involved. It could be for example that the individual does not have time to participate, or that they have limited opinions on the specific decision. The individual may provide a reason for standing aside. If the individual believes the reason can be remedied by the group, the group should seek to remedy the reason where possible, with help from the facilitator.

The TSC will make every reasonable effort to reach unanimity based consensus. If unanimity seems unlikely after several failed attempts to revise the proposal and Test for Agreement, if the proposal is clear, the decision may be moved to a vote, at the discretion of the TSC Chairs. This is a last resort.

The "Determine resolution" step should result in the creation of an [Any Decision Record](./docs/adr/README.md). More details in following sections.

#### Decision-making via vote

> Any call for public TSC votes will be made by creating an Issue in the TSC repository with the `tsc-vote` label assigned. The Issue should use the provided template.

Reviewer 3: We should consider creating multiple templates.  There are several options.

- Here's what I have for `json-everything`: https://github.com/gregsdennis/json-everything/tree/master/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE
- This is what MS uses for their dotnet repo (form): https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/02_api_proposal.yml

Author: Agreed. This will be one of our first orders of business =]

Once an Issue gains the label `tsc-vote`, all members of the TSC will be notified via a specific Slack channel (and by any additional method the TSC deems helpful). The votes will be collected by way of using GitHub Reactions on a specific comment, which must not be the first comment. The first comment must link to the voting comment in the same Issue.
Voting will by default close after 7 days. Any member of the TSC may request a 7 day extension for any reason, moving the closing date back by 7 days. Any member of the TSC may request additional extensions, approved at the discretion of any TSC chair.

For a vote to carry, a quorum of 75% is required by default.

If a TSC member wants to call for a vote that they wish to be non-public, they must do so by contacting the TSC Chairs directly.

> At the discretion of the TSC Chairs, a vote may be made non-public, and will then be handled by creating an Issue in the 'TSC-private' repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the discretion of the TSC Chairs, a vote may be made non-public, and will then be handled by creating an Issue in the `TSC-private` repository.
```

Backticks are used on line 208. Also maybe link to the repo?

(The quick consensus process does not require an Any Decision Record, but the decision should be minuted.)

Non-public decisions should be documented (as an ADR or otherwise) in the private `TSC-private` repository.

### Section 4.3: Other Project Roles

The JSON Schema project recognizes the need for both technical and non-technical roles. While the OpenJS Foundation takes on business responsibilities as the legal entity hosting the project, there are other non-technical responsibilities.

The TSC will look to create other roles as appropriate, and may update this document in accordance with the requirements for doing so, to formally recognize the additional roles.

The following responsibilities are recognised as those requiring roles to be defined by the TSC:
- Community and Industry connections
- Brand awareness, recognition, and health
- Strategic allocation of funds and budgeting for investment in JSON Schema and its ecosystem
- Education and training
- Financial allocation approval, tracking, and auditing

> ## Section 5: Definitions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Section 5: Definitions

```

> # JSON Schema Org Charter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# JSON Schema Charter
```

<!-- This document is managed in the json-schema-org/community GitHub repository. Please do NOT modify this file in another repository as changes may be overridden. -->

## 0: Guiding Principles

> The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation which operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. We strive to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Author: This is a direct copy from the Node.js charter: https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/blob/HEAD/TSC-Charter.md#section-1-guiding-principle

> The Node.js project is part of the OpenJS Foundation which operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. Project proposals, timelines, and status must not merely be open, but also easily visible to outsiders.

The OpenJS Foundation charter template links to the Node.js charter as the only example for that section. If that phrasing isn't OK, should the Node.js charter change too?

> The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation which operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. We strive to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I'm suspecting that this is a leftover from the Node.js Foundation when the charter was more of a foundation-level charter than a project-level one.

> The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation which operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. We strive to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Author: I raised an issue on the Node.js repo regarding this.

## 1: Scope
JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.
While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. We aim to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

### 1.1: In-scope
The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.
Primary concerns are areas we wish to give focus to, while secondary concerns are more likely to require the creation of a Special Interest Group.

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard
  - Validation of JSON data
  - Semantic annotation of JSON data
  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
  - Creation of new

>   - Ingestion of existing

Author: Interesting. Are there any other examples of this in other projects?

There is at least one project, which is mostly Python, so non-JS, but is critical to JSON Schema long term, for example.

>   - Ingestion of existing

Author: For the sake of linking things, I raised an issue: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1059

>   - Ingestion of existing

Reviewer 5: There isn't ground for blocking the charter on this topic because multiple projects have been doing this for ages: Node.js, Fastify, and possibly many other organizations.

These are the guidelines for transferring of a repository inside the Node.js organization in https://github.com/nodejs/admin/blob/main/transfer-repo-into-the-org.md.

Note that I recommend the two bullet points under "critical tooling" to be removed.

>   - Ingestion of existing

Author: I've removed the three lines under "ciritical tooling", for now.

  - Long term support
- Documentation
- Test suite
- Community
  - Enabling schema authors
  - Enabling implementers
  - Engaging with industry
  - Communicating value
  - Ensuring the sustainability of the project

Secondary Concerns
- Hypermedia
- Generating JSON Schema
- Using JSON Schema to generate
  - Code (including types or classes)
  - UI (including forms)
  - Databases
- Relational validation
- Vocabularies registry

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. We recognize the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and we encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Author: We had originally left this section blank, but filled it in under advisement of an industry vet. We frequently get asked why we can't do something about JSON or OpenAPI or multiple other specifications we do not control. People often assume that JSON and JSON Schema are controlled by the same group. I agreed it was helpful to make clear the bounds in which we operate, but we also wanted to make it clear we would advise such projects as they are interested.

>...provide a list of organizations with whom you plan to liaise and the kind of liaison work you're planning to carry out.

I feel establishing such a list would take months of work alone. We don't have clear and easy visibility over the ecosystem. That's something we have planned/tracked to fix.

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. We recognize the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and we encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Reviewer 4: The list doesn't need to be exhaustive. Just point to those you already have relationships with (or plan to have relationships with) and the standards they are responsible for.

I understand the desire to redirect folks who mix you up with another org to the right org, but anyone who's digging into your charter is savvy enough not to make that mistake. Leave that redirection to more public-facing properties.

The out-of-scope section should focus on describing activities that are out of scope but could be considered in scope by someone knowledgeable. For example, are you planning to define specific JSON schemas? E.g. can I come to you to define a JSON schema for SBOMs?

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. We recognize the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and we encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Author: It really is just OpenAPI and AsyncAPI at this point in time.
We don't have any specific plans at this point in time to connect with any other specific specification or project.

> I understand the desire to redirect folks who mix you up with another org to the right org, but anyone who's digging into your charter is savvy enough not to make that mistake. Leave that redirection to more public-facing properties.

Can you help me understand how you've reached this conclusion please?
We do see people who are knowledgeable about OpenAPI, but aren't aware the JSON Schema project is separate. I imagine these people are savvy enough to go read a charter.

> The out-of-scope section should focus on describing activities that are out of scope but could be considered in scope by someone knowledgeable.

From experience, people do ask us if we can go fix or modify a JSON Schema created and published by someone else. I believe that a proportion of those are knwledgeable in their project, but not in JSON Schema. Does your expereince differ?

> For example, are you planning to define specific JSON schemas? E.g. can I come to you to define a JSON schema for SBOMs?

Is that not already covered by "specifications that use JSON Schema"?

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. We recognize the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and we encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Reviewer 4: > It really is just OpenAPI and AsyncAPI at this point in time. We don't have any specific plans at this point in time to connect with any other specific specification or project.

I'd suggest just listing those two, then.
 
> > I understand the desire to redirect folks who mix you up with another org to the right org, but anyone who's digging into your charter is savvy enough not to make that mistake. Leave that redirection to more public-facing properties.
> Can you help me understand how you've reached this conclusion please? We do see people who are knowledgeable about OpenAPI, but aren't aware the JSON Schema project is separate. I imagine these people are savvy enough to go read a charter.

Oh, they're absolutely savvy enough to go read a charter! My point is that by the time they _find_ the charter, they will have done way enough digging to have a good mental model of who's responsible for what.

> > The out-of-scope section should focus on describing activities that are out of scope but could be considered in scope by someone knowledgeable.
> From experience, people do ask us if we can go fix or modify a JSON Schema created and published by someone else. I believe that a proportion of those are knwledgeable in their project, but not in JSON Schema. Does your expereince differ?

I think that we agree about the underlying issues but have a different perspective on the role of the charter.

IMHO, the charter is really about delegating and scoping rights and responsibilities from the Foundation to the Board to the CPC and to the Project. I feel like common misconceptions about the project are a better fit for a more visible FAQ (that you can update as needed) than for the charter (which will need CPC approval any time you want to fix something in it.)

> > For example, are you planning to define specific JSON schemas? E.g. can I come to you to define a JSON schema for SBOMs?
> 
> Is that not already covered by "specifications that use JSON Schema"?

Well the current says that the project "has no control over specifications that use JSON Schema." That's a statement of facts, not a statement of intention of not editing or publishing such documents. I'd be much more explicit about that (I had completely missed that, fwiw).

## 2: Relationship with OpenJS Foundation CPC.
Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of the JSON Schema project, it is delegated to the JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee ("TSC").

### 2.1 Other Formal Project Relationships
Section Intentionally Left Blank

## 3: JSON Schema Org Governing Body (TSC)
The TSC is initially established from the observed major contributors who are currently active and in good standing.

There is no maximum TSC membership size. The TSC must have a minimum of four members.

Changes to TSC membership should be posted in the agenda, and may be suggested as any other agenda item.

TSC memberships are not time-limited.

> While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.

Reviewer 5: I would remove this block entirely. If you ever want to achieve impact status, you can add it back and ask for a charter change to the CPC.

> While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.

Author: @mcollina This doesn't seem unreasonable, however we want to send the right signals to the community. There has already been some concerns voiced that JSON Schema is turning into a Postman thing, run by Postman. We want to be clear this is not the intent.

> While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.

Reviewer 5: My experience with charters is that they should be as loose as possible to minimize future work.

You can defer to the project to self-organize, something as Fastify does: https://github.com/fastify/fastify/blob/main/PROJECT_CHARTER.md#section-3-fastify-governing-body.

> While the project is not looking to obtain "Impact" project status within the OpenJS Foundation, there is no requirement set out to limit the number of TSC members by employer. It is in some cases considered difficult or even unhelpful for the project to limit the number or percentage of TSC members by employer (especially when an employer has employed individuals already active in the community to work exclusively on the open source project). While at this time there are no limits on TSC membership by employer, the TSC will strive to keep to at least less than 50%, ideally 33% (One third, one in three). The TSC will re-evaluate this specific clause at least every six months, and aim to revise it within one year to meet the "no more than 1/3 employer member affiliation" mandate.

Reviewer 4: Agree with @mcollina on principle of keeping governance small and avoiding to bake it implementation details. That said, it’s also perfectly fine to have additional requirements in the charter, such as aiming for multi-vendor governance, even if you don’t plan to go for impact status.

TSC members are expected to regularly participate in TSC activities.

> The TSC will meet regularly using virtual conferencing tools. The meeting will be directed by the TSC Chairperson(s). Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by a TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording will be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When the TSC meets using virtual conferencing tools, the meeting will be directed by the TSC Chairperson(s). Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by a TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording will be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.
```

I would lose this wording.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Author: That's the intent! Public as much as possible!
I note that the CPC has a private portion of the call on occasion, for whatever reason.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Reviewer 4: Whereby I meant that the session should be public by default (with an agenda and videoconf link made available upfront), not that it is private by default and that the TSC may decide to open it.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Reviewer 5: I think this sentence is correct. It should be specified somewhere else that there might a private portion of the meeting.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Reviewer 4: > I think this sentence is correct. It should be specified somewhere else that there might a private portion of the meeting.

Well, but the problem of making allowing access to the TSC meeting at the discretion of the TSC, is that this makes the meeting private by default, and requires action by the TSC to make it public.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Author: It doesn't say that. It says the TSC may invite people to the public portion of the meeting. You're reading into it something which isn't there.

Technically, as it is public, and the details of how to access it will be public, anyone could invite anyone. But I wanted to make it explicit that TSC may invite guests.

I don't recall specifically where I borrowed the phrasing from, but I agree it is not clear and can be improved.

> The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

Reviewer 4: > You're reading into it something which isn't there.

I dont doubt your intentions. I’m stating that the text doesn’t match them. ;)

A TSC member may be removed by vote from the TSC if, during a 3-month period, all of the following are true:

- They do not participate in any TSC related discussions or votes
- They do not provide any form of excuse or no excuse is known for their absence

> The initial TSC members are [Ben Hutton](https://github.com/relequestual), [Austin Wright](https://github.com/awwright), [Greg Dennis](https://github.com/gregsdennis), [Julian Berman](https://github.com/Julian), [Jason Desrosiers](https://github.com/jdesrosiers), and [Karen Etheridge](https://github.com/karenetheridge), with Ben Hutton being the initial chair.

Reviewer 5: List those somewhere else, possibly in the README.md or GOVERNANCE.md files

If "Reservations" is signalled three consecutive times by the same individual/s, anyone may call for no further attempts to remediate the reservations, and the proposal will pass.

Signaling "Stand Aside" convey consent, but an unwillingness for whatever reason to be further involved. It could be for example that the individual does not have time to participate, or that they have limited opinions on the specific decision. The individual may provide a reason for standing aside. If the individual believes the reason can be remedied by the group, the group should seek to remedy the reason where possible, with help from the facilitator.

The TSC will make every reasonable effort to reach unanimity based consensus. If unanimity seems unlikely after several failed attempts to revise the proposal and Test for Agreement, if the proposal is clear, the decision may be moved to a vote, at the discretion of the TSC Chairs. This is a last resort.

> The "Determine resolution" step should result in the creation of an [Any Decision Record](./docs/adr/README.md). More details in following sections.

Author: I really struggle with this.

I started with much less detail, expecting that we would define our process in a separate document later, but the feedback asked to provide more detail and more specifics here.

This IS the simplified version. I refined it and reduced it multiple times.

Most charters seem to link to the wikipedia page on "consensus" and don't specify anything further, which I don't feel is sufficient.

> The "Determine resolution" step should result in the creation of an [Any Decision Record](./docs/adr/README.md). More details in following sections.

Reviewer 4: Regardless, this still mixes policy and implementation details.

> The "Determine resolution" step should result in the creation of an [Any Decision Record](./docs/adr/README.md). More details in following sections.

Reviewer 7: I strongly agree with @tobie on this. I've also expressed my concerns about the complexity of this process. I expect the policy details to drift as we put this into practice and see what works and what doesn't. If it's not required to include this in the charter, I think it's better off as a separate document that we don't need to go through an approval process to change.

(The quick consensus process does not require an Any Decision Record, but the decision should be minuted.)

Non-public decisions should be documented (as an ADR or otherwise) in the private `TSC-private` repository.

### 4.3: Other Project Roles

The JSON Schema project recognizes the need for both technical and non-technical roles. While the OpenJS Foundation takes on business responsibilities as the legal entity hosting the project, there are other non-technical responsibilities.

The TSC will look to create other roles as appropriate, and may update this document in accordance with the requirements for doing so, to formally recognize the additional roles.

The following responsibilities are recognized as those requiring roles to be defined by the TSC:
- Community and Industry connections
- Brand awareness, recognition, and health

> - Strategic allocation of funds and budgeting for investment in JSON Schema and its ecosystem

Author: JSON Schema has an Open Collective fund. It's been made clear that such funds fall outside the remit of the OpenJS Foundation.

Does that mean we can't mention these funds in our charter?

If we made it clear that this relates specifically to funds raised on sponsorship platforms, would that be enough/OK?

> - Strategic allocation of funds and budgeting for investment in JSON Schema and its ecosystem

Reviewer 4: > Does that mean we can't mention these funds in our charter?

That's what I understand from the trademark section of the [IP policy](https://trademark-policy.openjsf.org). I'm not an authority on the topic, however.

- Education and training

> - Financial allocation approval, tracking, and auditing

Author: As above: https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/pull/325/files/631db8cc8a61a14e48e7f4fcb0e7569155006d99#r1173630417

## 5: Definitions

The JSON Schema project: The project which is housed by the OpenJS Foundation which operates as The JSON Schema Org.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Author: The "project" encompasses all of the JSON Schema things, such as the Slack server and various social media profiles. The "Org" is what we use when referring to the GitHub organization specifically.

Maybe it isn't a useful distinction to have. I don't recall the specific event and reasoning that caused me to add it.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 7: The way I think about, the distinction is similar to a company and the products it produces. Using this analogy, the "JSON Schema Org" is the company and the "JSON Schema project" is the product the company produces. It's confusing because we have only one "product" and our "company" is named after the product, but I do see these as two separate concepts.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 4: So the fact that you have a different understanding of those terms and that that distinction isn't relevant within the charter, I'd just drop it off for now. From the perspective of the foundation (and thus this charter) the "JSON Schema Project" _is_ the organization in @jdesrosiers's example, so I'd just use that term or just "JSON Schema," but not "JSON Schema Org" which feels like the GitHub org (as @Relequestual alludes to above) and reads funny.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 7: > I'd just drop it off for now. From the perspective of the foundation (and thus this charter) the "JSON Schema Project" is the organization

I agree that the distinction probably isn't relevant and that it can be dropped, but I would expect it the other way around. I would expect that the "JSON Schema Org" is what is relevant to the foundation and the "JSON Schema project" is probably not relevant within the charter. For example, I would consider a Hyper-Schema spec, a JSON Schema form generation spec, a JSON Schema code generation spec, etc, to all be separate "products" from the JSON Schema validation/annotation spec we have now and I would expect all of those to fall under the foundation' umbrella should we choose to pursue them.

Of course, this is just arguing semantics of made up terms, so it doesn't really matter, but all that is just to say that I'd prefer "JSON Schema Org" over "JSON Schema project" as the one term that the charter uses.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 4: > Of course, this is just arguing semantics of made up terms, so it doesn't really matter, but all that is just to say that I'd prefer "JSON Schema Org" over "JSON Schema project" as the one term that the charter uses.

I totally understand why. However from the CPC’s charter and the bylaws, _project_ is the chosen term. So adopting a different term will lead to weirdness for policies and processes written at the CPC level (which, unsurprisingly, stands for Cross _Project_ Council).

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 7: Understood. In that case, "project" is fine with me. Thanks for sharing your expertise.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 4: > Understood. In that case, "project" is fine with me. Thanks for sharing your expertise.

No, thanks for your understanding! It can be unpleasant to feel shoehorned into an ontology that doesn’t really match your collective representation of the space you’re operating in.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Reviewer 3: > It's confusing because we have only one "product" and our "company" is named after the product, but I do see these as two separate concepts. - @jdesrosiers 

Like "Slack" the product vs "Slack" the company.

> The JSON Schema Org: The people, policies, processes, activities, and artifacts, found within the GitHub json-schema-org.

Author: Resolving this as I've removed the definitions.

TSC: The Technical Steering Committee, delegated technical leadership for the JSON Schema project by the OpenJS Foundation.

---

This work is a derivative of the [WebdriverIO Project Governance Model](https://github.com/webdriverio/webdriverio/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md).

Inspired by https://seedsforchange.org.uk/consensus, https://seedsforchange.org.uk/quickconsensus
Informed by https://www.ic.org/busting-the-myth-that-consensus-with-unanimity-is-good-for-communities/

> This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 UK: England & Wales License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/uk/).

Author: I'd be fine if it had multiple licenses if that helps.
As chunks of this was based on the WebdriverIO governance document, which was under that license, we must, too, also use that license.

> This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 UK: England & Wales License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/uk/).

Reviewer 4: I don't see why the Board wouldn't approve this. It'll just need approval nonetheless.

> This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 UK: England & Wales License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/uk/).

Author: I've made a note of this in our pre-merge checklist, so I'll resolve this comment thread.

## Section 1: Scope
<!-- https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/286#discussioncomment-4391250 -->

JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.
While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. We aim to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

### 1.1: In-scope (optional)
<!-- https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/286#discussioncomment-4391253 -->

The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.
Primary concerns are areas we wish to give focus to, while secondary concerns are more likely to require the creation of a Special Interest Group.

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard
  - Validation of JSON data
  - Semantic annotation of JSON data
  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
  - Creation of new

>   - Ingestion of existing

Author: I think it's right and benficial to absorb some specific tools and create new specific tools, but I do not think we should, as a general rule, look to absorb implementations, unless there is a very good reason/argument for doing so.

For me, "tooling" is distinct from implementations.

>   - Ingestion of existing

Reviewer 6: I do think having some tooling inside the main org my help to accelerate the adoption of JSON Schema by generating more trust. In the other hand, comments like [this](https://twitter.com/JoshCGrossman/status/1636303217360248834?s=20) shows people's reservations with individual projects.

>   - Ingestion of existing

Reviewer 3: Sure.

  - Long term support

>   - (Including linting)

Author: Not sure. Opted to remove it.

The JSON Schema project is part of the OpenJS Foundation which operates transparently, openly, collaboratively, and ethically. We strive to be open and transparent as much as is possible, and wish to enable anyone to interact and engage with any area of our work.

Having no structure in place usually leads to one that is informal and undocumented, making it difficult to meet our own expectations of how we wish to operate. As such, we define the following charter which includes aspects of the governance model to which we subscribe and by which we operate.

## Section 1: Scope
<!-- https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/286#discussioncomment-4391250 -->

JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.
While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. We aim to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

> ### 1.1: In-scope (optional)

Reviewer 8: I assume removing these (optional) suffixes is part of the "removal of comments" checkbox right?

Author: Added this explicitly. Thanks for checking.

The JSON Schema project is jointly governed by a Technical Steering Committee (TSC) which is responsible for high-level guidance of the project.

The TSC has final authority over this project including:

- Technical direction
- Project governance and process (including this policy)
- Contribution policy
- GitHub repository hosting and administration
- Establishment of and delegation to working groups or teams
- Mediating technical conflicts
- Mediating non-technical conflicts (until a formal Code of Conduct Committee is established)

### Section 4.1 Project Operations & Management (optional)
<!-- https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/286#discussioncomment-4391290 -->

The TSC and entire technical community will follow any processes as may be specified by the OpenJS Foundation Board relating to the intake and license compliance review of contributions, including the OpenJS Foundation IP Policy.

### Section 4.2: Decision-making and Voting
<!-- https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/discussions/286#discussioncomment-4391296 -->
Note: See comments found in raw view...

> The TSC follows a formal consensus seeking decision making model.

Reviewer 6: Are we considering adding a limit of time for the consensus process?

Author: I asked this sort of question here: https://github.com/orgs/json-schema-org/discussions/338
Only two people replied (thank you!), so I'm just going to have to do SOMETHING and see objections during the review process, I guess.

Author: @benjagm I have added some time limits around some parts of the consensus process: https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/pull/325/files#diff-91d16dd057bd39f6431e90a1d78e9224eafafcedc611eba0878d77e6fda86601R179

If this looks OK for now, can you approve and resolve this review comment please? =]

Reviewer 6: Looks good to me. Thanks for this change.

If "Reservations" is signalled three consecutive times by the same individual/s, anyone may call for no further attempts to remediate the reservations, and the proposal will pass.

Signalling "Stand Aside" convey consent, but an unwillingness for whatever reason to be further involved. It could be for example that the individual does not have time to participate, or that they have limited opinions on the specific decision. The individual may provide a reason for standing aside. If the individual believes the reason can be remedied by the group, the group should seek to remedy the reason where possible, with help from the facilitator.

The TSC will make every reasonable effort to reach unanimity based consensus. If unanimity seems unlikely after several failed attempts to revise the proposal and Test for Agreement, if the proposal is clear, the decision may be moved to a vote, at the discretion of the TSC Chairs. This is a last resort.

> The "Determine resolution" step should result in the creation of an [Any Decision Record](./docs/adr/README.md). More details in following sections.

Reviewer 3: link is broken

Reviewer 3: The file exists... https://github.com/json-schema-org/community/blob/main/docs/adr/README.md

Might just be a PR thing.

Once an Issue gains the label `tsc-vote`, all members of the TSC will be notified via a specific Slack channel (and by any additional method the TSC deems helpful). The votes will be collected by way of using GitHub Reactions on a specific comment, which must not be the first comment. The first comment must link to the voting comment in the same Issue.
Voting will by default close after 7 days. Any member of the TSC may request a 7 day extension for any reason, moving the closing date back by 7 days. Any member of the TSC may request additional extensions, approved at the discretion of any TSC chair.

For a vote to carry, a quorum of 75% is required by default.

If a TSC member wants to call for a vote that they wish to be non-public, they must do so by contacting the TSC Chairs directly.
At the discretion of the TSC Chairs, a vote may be made non-public, and will then be handled by creating an Issue in the 'TSC-private' repository.

The topic and nature of non-public votes may remain non-public, including the results.(It is expected that vast majority of votes will be public. Non-public voting should only be used in exceptional circumstances.)

#### Documenting decisions

> Either initially, or at any point during the process, any TSC member may suggest the issue being discussed is "significant or noteworthy." If there are no objections, the resolution actions for the issue must include the creation of an Any Decision Record (Previously named Architectural Decision Record). The Any Decision Record (ADR) should include as much information as is thought to be useful, following the provided template. The Pull Request for the ADR must be approved by all those who were involved in the decision making process, which must also be documented in the ADR as the "deciders."

Reviewer 3: Previously -> previously

Is it necessary to mention that it had a previous name since as of charter creation it's only had one name?

Author: I think it is. It has been known as Architectural Decision Records for a long time in many places, and people may not realise the naming has changed.

Author: Thanks for picking up on the nit. Now fixed.

> (The quick consensus process does not require a Decision Record, but the decision should be minuted.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(The quick consensus process does not require a Any Decision Record, but the decision should be minuted.)
```

TSC members are expected to regularly participate in TSC activities.

The TSC will meet regularly using virtual conferencing tools. The meeting will be directed by the TSC Chairperson(s). Responsibility for directing individual meetings may be delegated by a TSC Chairperson to any other TSC member. Minutes or an appropriate recording will be taken and made available to the community through accessible public postings.

The TSC may, at its discretion, invite any number of non-voting observers to participate in the public portion of TSC discussions and meetings.

A TSC member may be removed by vote from the TSC if, during a 3-month period, all of the following are true:

> - They attend fewer than 25% of the regularly scheduled meetings

Reviewer 7: It wasn't the quantification that I thought was the problem, it was the focus on meetings. For example, Karen doesn't attend our meetings, but there's no question that her contributions warrant membership in the TSC. A rule like this would seem to exclude her.

Suggestion: "They have not regularly contributed to discussions in Github, Slack, or meetings"

> - They attend fewer than 25% of the regularly scheduled meetings

Author: Agreed. I can see I didn't make that clear.

How could we quantify "regularly" to make it less subjective? Or do you feel it would be ok to leave it as subjective?

> - They attend fewer than 25% of the regularly scheduled meetings

Reviewer 7: I think it would be good make it less subjective, but I'm not sure how to accomplish that. There are some many ways to contribute, it's hard to quantify. I'll let you know if I think of anything, but I'm ok with it be subjective if we can't come up with something better.

> - They attend fewer than 25% of the regularly scheduled meetings

Author: I've removed the meeting line and gone with...

> - They do not participate in any TSC related discussions or votes
> - They do not provide any form of excuse or no excuse is known for their absence

This seems sufficiant for now, as this is intended for when someone "dropps off the grid".

I'll resolve this thread for now, and leave you to provide a full PR review if you're happy.

Moving to the 'Form a Proposal" stage should be approached when the group might feel able to combine ideas to form a single proposal. Multiple possible solutions should be discussed in the previous stage.

The "Test for Agreement" step is not voting, and is in stead asking for "signals", which enable the consensus process to continue.
Voting should be considered a last resort if the consensus process has failed for a particular issue, to enable the project to move forward.

If someone calls for a Test for Agreement, the facilitator for the decision discussion will review current proposal and may call to Test for Agreement. The facilitator will post a comment on the Issue (using the provided template), linking to the current version of the proposal, and update the opening comment with a link to the new comment. TSC members will then be asked to signal their agreement using GitHub Reactions on the comment.

The signals include "Block". Any use of the "Block" signal will require a new or amended proposal to be worked on. A "Block" should be used to indicate a strong objection, such as something against the projects core principals or something that would harm the project.

> The blocker/s should be prepared to commit to trying to find a solution, but not necessarily form and present a solution by themselves. The TSC will look to facilitate a number of workshops to help understand the blocking objections, and form a new or amended proposal as a result.

Author: ```suggestion
The blocker/s should be prepared to commit to trying to find a solution, but not necessarily form and present a solution by themselves. The TSC will look to facilitate a number of workshops to help understand the blocking objections, and form a new or amended proposal as a result. If the blocker/s are unable or unwilling to participate in attempts to find a solution, after multiple attempts, the original proposal is moved to a vote, as defined in this document, but additionally requiring a 75% super majority to pass. This will be at the discression of the TSC Chairs.
```

The topic and nature of non-public votes may remain non-public, including the results.(It is expected that vast majority of votes will be public. Non-public voting should only be used in exceptional circumstances.)

#### Documenting decisions

Either initially, or at any point during the process, any TSC member may suggest the issue being discussed is "significant or noteworthy." If there are no objections, the resolution actions for the issue must include the creation of an Any Decision Record (previously named Architectural Decision Record). The Any Decision Record (ADR) should include as much information as is thought to be useful, following the provided template. The Pull Request for the ADR must be approved by all those who were involved in the decision making process, which must also be documented in the ADR as the "deciders."

(The quick consensus process does not require an Any Decision Record, but the decision should be minuted.)

Non-public decisions should be documented (as an ADR or otherwise) in the private `TSC-private` repository.

### Section 4.3: Other Project Roles (optional)

> The JSON Schema project recognises the need for both technical and non-technical roles. While the OpenJS Foundation takes on business responsibilities as the legal entity hosting the project, there are other non-technical responsibilities.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The JSON Schema project recognizes the need for both technical and non-technical roles. While the OpenJS Foundation takes on business responsibilities as the legal entity hosting the project, there are other non-technical responsibilities.
```

> The TSC will look to create other roles as appropriate, and may update this document in accordance with the requirements for doing so, to formally recognise the additional roles.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The TSC will look to create other roles as appropriate, and may update this document in accordance with the requirements for doing so, to formally recognize the additional roles.
```

Having no structure in place usually leads to one that is informal and undocumented, making it difficult to meet our own expectations of how the TSC wish to operate. As such, the JSON Schema project define the following charter which includes aspects of the governance model to which the TSC subscribe and by which the TSC operate.

## 1: Scope
JSON Schema aims to enable the confident and reliable use of the JSON data format. It does this primarily by providing specification documents which define a declarative language that allows annotation and validation of JSON documents.
While JSON Schema's primary target is constraint-based data validation, it continues to be used across the whole stack, in different stages of a given project, and for purposes beyond its original design. The JSON Schema project aims to enable these additional and emergent use cases.

### 1.1: In-scope
The scope of the JSON Schema project is split into two sections: primary and secondary concerns.

> Primary concerns are areas the JSON Schema project wish to give focus to, while secondary concerns are more likely to require the desire of the community to drive the work.

Author: Thanks for your suggestion!

Primary Concerns
- Publication of the JSON Schema standard
  - Validation of JSON-compatible data
  - Semantic annotation of JSON-compatible data
  - Interoperability
  - Extensibility
- Critical tooling
- Documentation
- Test suite
- Community
  - Enabling schema authors
  - Enabling implementers
  - Engaging with industry
  - Communicating value
  - Ensuring the sustainability of the project

Secondary Concerns
- Hypermedia
- Generating JSON Schema
- Using JSON Schema to generate
  - Code (including types or classes)
  - UI (including forms)
  - Databases
- Relational validation
- Vocabularies registry

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. JSON Schema recognizes the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and JSON Schema encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Author: Yeah, I can see how that would make more senes.

> While the JSON Schema project has no control over the specifications it uses (such as JSON and IRI), nor specifications that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI and AsyncAPI), the JSON Schema project has, and continues to, provide expert opinion, advice, and support, as time allows. JSON Schema recognizes the importance and value of the ecosystem surrounding JSON Schema, and JSON Schema encourage those developing standards and tooling to reach out at any time.

Author: I've made a revision. In the end I added to "in scope"...
> Engaging with upstream and downstream standards and projects

This keeps it broad and allows for a varity of levels of involvement.

Let me know your thoughts.

## 2: Relationship with OpenJS Foundation CPC.
Most large, complex open source communities have both a business and a technical governance model. Technical leadership for the projects within the OpenJS Foundation is delegated to the projects through their project charters by the OpenJS Cross Project Council (CPC). In the case of the JSON Schema project, it is delegated to the JSON Schema Technical Steering Committee ("TSC").

### 2.1 Other Formal Project Relationships
Section Intentionally Left Blank

## 3: JSON Schema Governing Body (TSC)

> See GOVERNANCE.md

Author: I have comitted a slightly modifid version of your suggestion. Thanks.

- Vocabularies registry

### 1.2: Out-of-Scope

> Neither standards that the JSON Schema project uses (such as JSON and IRI) nor standards or projects that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI or AsyncAPI) are in scope, nor does the JSON Schema project has any control over them.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Neither standards that the JSON Schema project uses (such as JSON and IRI) nor standards or projects that use JSON Schema (such as OpenAPI or AsyncAPI) are in scope, nor does the JSON Schema project have any control over them.
```

Author: Thanks @ljharb!
